---
title: 'We are hiring: Postdoctoral Researcher in Digital History'
status: published
category: news
seealso:
  - /consortium/partners/
  - /project/objectives/
figure:
  - src: posts/hiring3.jpeg
---

We are recruiting a Postdoctoral researcher in Digital History to join our Luxembourg-based team. This position offers a unique opportunity to contribute to a large-scale effort aimed at rethinking how we process, explore, and interpret historical media collections using computational methods.

<!-- more -->

In this role, you will help us advance [Impresso’s core ambition](/project/objectives/): to link historical newspaper and radio collections across time, languages, modalities, and borders, and to develop exploratory and computational tools that open up new perspectives on historical research.

As part of the team, you will conduct original, data-driven research in media history, contribute your historical expertise to the co-design of the Impresso Web App and Datalab, and engage actively with the digital humanities and computational history research communities through events, workshops, and user-oriented initiatives.

This is a 21-month full-time position (40h/week), based at the Luxembourg Centre for Contemporary and Digital History (C²DH), with an annual gross salary of EUR 83,099.


## Key Responsibilities

- Conduct original data-driven historical research on newspaper and radio sources
-Contribute to the development of innovative computational research methods building on Impresso’s corpus of multilingual newspaper and radio sources provided by a network of Western European partners
- Contribute to the design of the Impresso Web App and the Impresso Datalab together with a team of designers and experts in natural language processing and history
- Engage in outreach activities such as workshops, conferences, trainings and teaching and user evaluations
- Contribute to other Impresso work packages as needed and participate in on-site meetings with partners in Switzerland


## What we expect from you

- A PhD in history or a related discipline, or a PhD in computer science with proven experience in historical research
- Demonstrated experience in humanities research using digital or computational methods
- Motivation to work in an interdisciplinary team combining history, design, and computational approaches
- Strong organisational and methodological skills; ability to meet deadlines and work independently
- Fluency in English is required; knowledge of French, German, and/or Dutch is an asset


## Advantageous are

- Knowledge of at least one programming language, preferably Python
- Knowledge of machine learning
- Knowledge of current debates in media history
- Experience in working with data derived from historical newspaper and radio collections

## In a nutshell

- 21 months full time (40h/week) fixed term contract
- Application deadline is 30 April 2025
- Annual gross salary of 83099 EUR
- Applications must include a Curriculum Vitae and a Cover letter and must be submitted via [University of Luxembourg’s recruitment portal.](https://recruitment.uni.lu/en/details.html?nPostingId=106376&nPostingTargetId=152059&id=QMUFK026203F3VBQB7V7VV4S8&LG=UK&languageSelect=UK&sType=Social%20Recruiting&mask=karriereseiten). 

For any open questions, please contact [Marten Düring](mailto:marten.during@uni.lu). 


The [University of Luxembourg](https://www.uni.lu/en/) is an international research university with a distinctly multilingual and interdisciplinary character. The University was founded in 2003 and counts more than 6,700 students and more than 2,000 employees from around the world. The University’s faculties and interdisciplinary centres focus on research in the areas of Computer Science and ICT Security, Materials Science, European and International Law, Finance and Financial Innovation, Education, Contemporary and Digital History. In addition, the University focuses on cross-disciplinary research in the areas of Data Modelling and Simulation as well as Health and System Biomedicine. Times Higher Education ranks the University of Luxembourg #3 worldwide for its “international outlook,” #20 in the Young University Ranking 2021 and among the top 250 universities worldwide.

The [Luxembourg Centre for Contemporary and Digital History (C2DH)](https://www.c2dh.uni.lu/) is a research centre for the study, analysis and public dissemination of contemporary history of Luxembourg and Europe with a particular focus on digital methods and tools for doing innovative historical research. It serves as a catalyst for innovative and creative scholarship and new forms of public dissemination and societal engagement with history.

The University of Luxembourg embraces inclusion and diversity as key values. We are fully committed to removing any discriminatory barrier related to gender, and not only, in recruitment and career progression of our staff.
